
===== PAGE 1 =====
2026-08-21
EnvHarness: Awakening Static Worlds for
Agent Learning
Chengsong Huang1*, Zifeng Wang2, Rujun Han2, Jun Yan2, Yanfei Chen2, Zoey CuiZhu2, Ke Jiang2, Peng Xia4,
Han Yu2, Yufan Zhuang2, Yifei Ming2, Jiaqi Pan3, Bhavana Dalvi Mishra2, Jiaxin Huang1, Burak Gokturk2,
Tomas Pfister2 and Chen-Yu Lee2
1Washington University in St. Louis, 2Google Cloud AI Research, 3Google Cloud, 4University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
LLM agents learn by interacting with environments, yet these environments are hand-built and static:
blind to an agent’s weaknesses, and quickly left behind as it improves. While recent environment
generation methods attempt to address this, they require domain-specific pipelines, rely on expensive or
unreliable verifiers, and still produce static environments. To alleviate the engineering burden of rebuild-
ing environments from scratch, we propose Environment Harness (EnvHarness), a programmable
layer of plug-in components that wraps a static environment to reshape its behavior without modifying
the underlying logic. Operating through standard interfaces, EnvHarness applies across diverse
domains while ensuring every reshaped environment retains its original verifier. To automate this
process, we introduce EnvRigger, which treats the target policy as a black box, observing its execution
trajectories to synthesize EnvHarness components targeting diagnosed flaws, and validating them
via fresh rollouts. Across five benchmarks in four domains, EnvHarness outperforms both original
environments and domain-specific environment generation pipelines, achieving up to a 9.0-point im-
provement on held-out instances with 9.8% fewer execution steps. Furthermore, EnvHarness provides
a superior optimization signal for reinforcement learning, enabling continuous, targeted co-evolution of
the policy and its environment.
github.com/google-research/envharness
www.envharness.com
45
50
55
SWE-bench Verified
47.7
49.9
52.6
OfficeQA
54.2
54.4
56.2
SpreadsheetBench
46.4
45.9
49.1
Base agent
Learn from real envs
Learn from EnvHarness envs (ours)
48
51
54
0
100
200
300
Number of environments
Resolved rate (%)
EnvHarness
envs (ours)
SWE-Lite
(real envs)
SWE-smith
(SOTA scaling)
Figure 1 | Overall performance. Left: Agents learning from EnvHarness environments consistently
outperform those learning from the original environments across software engineering and office
automation benchmarks, including SWE-bench Verified, OfficeQA, and SpreadsheetBench. Right:
On SWE-bench Verified, under an identical environment budget, EnvHarness keeps improving as
environments scale, while real and generated environments flatten out.
1. Introduction
As LLMs are deployed as autonomous agents, the source of learning shifts from curated text data to
interactive environments. Whether navigating web pages (Gur et al., 2024), resolving issues in a
Corresponding author(s): chengsong@wustl.edu, {zifengw, chenyulee}@google.com
* This work was done while Chengsong interned at Google Cloud AI Research.
arXiv:2608.19880v1  [cs.AI]  20 Aug 2026

===== PAGE 2 =====
EnvHarness : Awakening Static Worlds for Agent Learning
Figure 2 | While an agent harness transforms a frozen LLM into a capable agent via plug-in components
(e.g., skills, memory, tools) without altering model weights, EnvHarness applies this same principle
to the other side of the interaction. It customizes a frozen environment with plug-in components
while leaving original environment unchanged.
codebase (Yang et al., 2024), or controlling an embodied platform (Wang et al., 2023), agents rely
on their respective environments to acquire learning signals (Yao et al., 2022b). These environments
act as interactive counterparts that present specific tasks, manage changing states, respond to actions,
and evaluate success (Li et al., 2026). Unfortunately, building them requires substantial human effort
to hardcode the interaction logic and verifiers (Merrill et al., 2026; Zhang et al., 2025). Consequently,
the resulting environments remain rigidly static, behaving identically regardless of which agent
interacts with them or how much that agent has improved (Hu et al., 2026). This rigidity limits agent
learning in two fundamental ways: it fails to provide a targeted signal that addresses a particular
agent’s weaknesses (Dennis et al., 2020; Jiang et al., 2021), and it has nothing more to teach once
the agent learns to solve the existing tasks (Beukman et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2019).
Since manually building environments is expensive, a growing line of work has turned to auto-
mated environment generation (Guo et al., 2025; Song et al., 2026; Zala et al., 2024). Despite its
scalability, this approach suffers from two major limitations. First, generation pipelines are inherently
domain-specific. Existing systems generate environments for web navigation (Trabucco et al., 2025),
programming (Pan et al., 2024), or tool use (Lee et al., 2026a), but a pipeline built for one setting
cannot transfer to the others. Second, ensuring correctness is both costly and unreliable. Because
these environments and verifiers are generated by LLMs, practitioners must over-generate and heavily
filter them (Wang et al., 2026; Yang et al., 2026a), which still cannot fully guarantee their correctness.
Rather than creating new environments to obtain learning signals, we propose Environment
Harness (EnvHarness), a programmable layer that transforms an existing, static environment
into a dynamically customized one without modifying the environment itself. We make an analogy
between EnvHarness and agent harness (Anthropic, 2025, 2026b; OpenAI, 2026) in Figure 2:
An agent harness provides LLMs with external memory, tools, and skills to handle complex tasks
beyond basic text generation. EnvHarness extends this concept to environments, equipping a
static environment with modular, plug-in components. A Stage sets the starting point of an episode,
a Contract controls the allowed actions and observations, and a Chain connects multiple base
environments to form an extended episode. The agent continues to use the standard interface, but
EnvHarness mediates this interaction. This enables a single environment to fulfill needs it was
never built for: isolating a specific skill, extending a task’s horizon, or calibrating difficulty so the
agent struggles but ultimately succeeds. Crucially, operating strictly at the interface level makes
EnvHarness domain-agnostic, while allowing every new environment to safely inherit the trusted,
human-built verifier of its original environment.
2

===== PAGE 3 =====
EnvHarness : Awakening Static Worlds for Agent Learning
While EnvHarness provides a universally applicable framework, its specific configuration must
be tailored to each target policy and task. To automate this customization process, we introduce
EnvRigger. By treating the policy strictly as a black box, EnvRigger observes both successful and
failed execution trajectories within the base environment to diagnose specific behavioral vulnerabilities.
Guided by these findings, it synthesizes candidate EnvHarness components and wraps the current
environment to evaluate them. EnvRigger then runs fresh policy rollouts, judging acceptance solely
on whether the candidate environment effectively cultivates the missing capabilities while remaining
solvable. Components failing this evaluation undergo iterative revision until they succeed. Ultimately,
this workflow realizes fully automated, task-policy-conditioned environment customization.
We conduct experiments on challenging benchmarks spanning embodied tasks (ALFWorld (Shrid-
har et al., 2020)), web browsing (WebArena (Zhou et al., 2024)), software engineering (SWE-bench
Verified (Jimenez et al., 2024)), and office work (OfficeQA (Databricks, 2025), SpreadsheetBench (Ma
et al., 2024)). Specifically, we evaluate EnvHarness across two representative learning paradigms:
skill-based learning (SL) and reinforcement learning (RL). In SL settings, agents trained with En-
vHarness environments outperform those trained on original environments, achieving up to 9.0
points of improvement on held-out tasks (Table 2) while using 9.8% fewer interaction steps (Table 3).
In RL settings, EnvHarness-customized environments similarly yield significantly stronger policies,
with up to 6.5 points of improvement (Table 4). Finally, repeatedly executing the EnvRigger loop
enables continuous co-evolution between the agent and its environment, unlocking compounding
performance gains that scale effectively with the number of customized tasks.
Our contributions are threefold: (1) We propose EnvHarness, a programmable layer that
customizes a static environment into a controllable one through its own reset/step interface,
instantiated as three types of plug-in components that reshape environment initial states, agent-
environment interaction interfaces, and composite tasks from different environments, all while the
original environment’s tasks and verifiers stay unchanged. (2) We introduce EnvRigger to automate
task-policy-conditioned environment customization. By diagnosing policy flaws from rollouts and
iteratively revising candidate components until fresh rollouts confirm their success, EnvRigger
ensures that every new environment targets the specific weaknesses of the policy. (3) Across five
benchmarks in four domains, EnvHarness improves both effectiveness (up to 9.0 points on held-out
tasks) and efficiency (9.8% fewer steps), strengthens policies under reinforcement learning, and
scales agent performance where both human-built and generated environments flatten out.
2. EnvHarness
2.1. The EnvHarness Paradigm
Table 1 | Analogy between Agent Harness and EnvHarness. Both scale capabilities through external
layers rather than changing the core system.
Agent Harness
EnvHarness (Ours)
Base System
Frozen LLM
Static environment
Designed to Solve
Lack of action, memory, or loops
Hardcoded interaction logic
Harness Layer
Capabilities (tools, memory)
Customization (states, rules, observations)
Unified Output
Autonomous agent
Customized environment
An agent harness (Anthropic, 2025, 2026b; OpenAI, 2026) is the software layer (execution loops,
tool registries, and context management) (Meng et al., 2026) that wraps a LLM to form an autonomous
agent (Agent = Model + Harness). It adds new capabilities without changing the model weights. We
3

===== PAGE 4 =====
EnvHarness : Awakening Static Worlds for Agent Learning
apply the same idea to the other side of the agent-environment loop. We define EnvHarness as
a programmable layer that wraps an existing, static environment and turns it into a customizable
one (Customized Env = Static Env + EnvHarness). EnvHarness achieves this customization by
modifying the information flow through the standard interface, leaving the underlying environment
completely untouched. Analogous to the tools and memory of an agent harness, EnvHarness is
assembled from modular plug-in components that tailor the environment to specific training needs
like isolating a specific skill, extending a task’s horizon, or adjusting task difficulty.
Formal Definition of EnvHarness.
We model an environment as a tuple 𝐸= (S, A, O, 𝑇, 𝑅, 𝑠0),
where S is the state space, A the action space, O the observation space, 𝑇: S × A →S the transition
function that maps a state and an action to the next state, 𝑅the reward induced by the verifier, and
𝑠0 the initial state. An EnvHarness component is an environment-agnostic transformation 𝑤:
𝐸′ = 𝑤(𝐸),
𝐸′ = (S′, A′, O′, 𝑇′, 𝑅′, 𝑠′
0).
(1)
𝑤reshapes the environment strictly at the interface level, without modifying its underlying
simulator backend or implementation details. It customizes the initial state (𝑠′
0), filters exposed
spaces (A′, O′), and updates transition mechanics (𝑇′). Because all interventions remain external, the
ground-truth evaluation logic is preserved, ensuring the original verifier still can score the episode.
2.2. Three EnvHarness Components
Environment
❄️
reset()
step(a)
obs()
Environment
❄️
reset()
step(a)
obs()
Stage  ( )
Environment
❄️
reset()
step(a)
obs()
Contract  (
)
Environment
❄️
reset()
step(a)
obs()
Chain  (logic 
)
Figure 3 | Overview of EnvHarness components wrapping the standard environment inter-
face. The underlying base environment (native state transitions and original task verifier) remains
completely frozen. From left to right: the base environment, followed by three EnvHarness compo-
nents—Stage, Contract, and Chain. Highlighted arrows and headers indicate overridden interface
methods, with code blocks showing how each wrapper modifies state initialization, transition dynam-
ics, or observation handling without altering the base environment.
The mapping 𝑤of Eq. (1) defines a general interface, and any transformation that follows this
interface is a valid EnvHarness component. In this work, we introduce three concrete types of
components, chosen to cover three fundamental modes of environment customization, and we expect
more to follow. Each type is specified by its own parameters, overriding standard environment
interface methods such as reset or step. Figure 3 compares the three component types with the
original interface, highlighting the specific method each component overrides. We detail the software
implementation of this interface protocol and class architecture in Appendix C. Throughout this
subsection, we illustrate the components on one ALFWorld task, “put a clean mug on the desk”,
where the default instance leaves the mug in the open and ends immediately upon placement.
4

===== PAGE 5 =====
EnvHarness : Awakening Static Worlds for Agent Learning
Stage: changing the initial state.
A Stage, 𝑤stage,𝛿, is specified by a sequence of state-manipulation
actions 𝛿= (𝑎1, . . . , 𝑎𝑘). These actions are applied to the initial state 𝑠0 produced by reset():
𝐸′ = 𝑤stage,𝛿(𝐸) = (S, A, O, 𝑇, 𝑅, 𝑠′
0),
where 𝑠′
0 = 𝑇(· · · 𝑇(𝑇(𝑠0, 𝑎1), 𝑎2) · · · , 𝑎𝑘) .
(2)
Under this transformation, only the initial state changes. A Stage customizes the agent’s starting
point, either introducing obstacles that require specific skills to tackle or completing early subgoals
in advance to shorten the task horizon. For example, in our running task, one Stage executes the
following sequence of actions: take mug 1, open drawer 1, put mug 1 in drawer 1, and
close drawer 1 on the state returned by reset(). This Stage intentionally hides the mug from
the agent, forcing the agent to face a more challenging scenario: search for the object first instead of
directly reaching for it in plain sight. Conversely, another Stage can simplify the setup by executing
cleaning the mug in advance, leaving only the final placement steps.
Contract: rewriting the interaction.
A Contract, 𝑤contract,𝑟, is specified by a triplet of transfor-
mation maps 𝑟= ( 𝑓𝐴, 𝑓𝑇, 𝑓𝑂), each defaulting to the identity. These maps rewrite the action space,
transition dynamics, and observation space, respectively:
𝐸′ = 𝑤contract,𝑟(𝐸) = (S, A′, O′, 𝑇′, 𝑅, 𝑠0),
where (A′, O′, 𝑇′) =  𝑓𝐴(A), 𝑓𝑂(O), 𝑓𝑇(𝑇)
.
(3)
In practice, these transformations enforce action preconditions, augment or mask observations, and
attach structured feedback to specific outcomes to steer agent learning. For example, on our running
task, one Contract configures 𝑓𝑂to truncate the room description after the first two sentences,
requiring the agent to build its spatial representation across several steps; another Contract uses 𝑓𝑇
to block the clean mug action if the agent is not holding the mug, forcing the agent to pick up the
object first; and a third Contract configures 𝑓𝐴to remove high-level teleport navigation commands,
forcing the agent to move and search step by step.
Chain: extending the environment.
A Chain, 𝑤chain,ℓ, is specified by a pair ℓ= (𝐸ext, 𝑔), where
𝐸ext is an additional environment and 𝑔is a composition logic. The composition logic combines the
original environment 𝐸and 𝐸ext into a composite environment 𝐸′ exposed through the same interface:
𝐸′ = 𝑤chain,ℓ(𝐸) = (S′, A′, O′, 𝑇′, 𝑅′, 𝑠′
0),
where 𝐸′ = 𝑔(𝐸, 𝐸ext).
(4)
To allow cross-environment combinations, the new spaces are simply the union of the base
environments (e.g., A′ = A ∪Aext), and 𝑅′ acts as the new composite reward. The composition logic
𝑔is unrestricted, allowing environments to be concatenated, interleaved, or branched dynamically
based on intermediate outcomes (see Appendix D for examples). The composition logic 𝑔can either
combine both environments from the start, or use the transition function 𝑇′ to dynamically transition
from one environment to the next once a specific condition is satisfied. For our running environment,
one Chain appends “heat a potato and put it on the countertop” in the same house, returning success
under 𝑅′ only when both environments are verified. This requires the agent to learn to carry its goal
past the point where it would otherwise have stopped.
Composition.
Because all EnvHarness components share a standard interface, they compose
freely. For example, stacking a Stage, a Contract, and a Chain on our base mug task yields a
single composite environment:
𝐸′ = 𝑤chain,ℓ
 𝑤contract,𝑟
 𝑤stage,𝛿(𝐸)
.
(5)
5

===== PAGE 6 =====
EnvHarness : Awakening Static Worlds for Agent Learning
In this setup, 𝑤stage,𝛿initializes the episode with the mug hidden in a drawer to enforce spatial
search; 𝑤contract,𝑟truncates the observation to two sentences to evaluate partial observability; and
𝑤chain,ℓappends a follow-up task to test goal persistence. Note that these transformations are non-
commutative (𝑤1 ◦𝑤2 ≠𝑤2 ◦𝑤1); the nesting order determines how the resulting environment is
constructed and which constraints apply during initialization versus active interaction.
3. EnvHarness for Agent Learning
3.1. Problem Setup
Given a base environment 𝐸supporting a set of base tasks, and a target policy agent 𝜋, our objective
is to automatically generate a modified environment 𝐸′ tailored to a specific task 𝑡, exposing the
unique flaws of 𝜋to facilitate targeted policy improvement. A single EnvHarness component is
itself policy-agnostic, as Eq. (1) defines 𝑤as a transformation of the environment alone, allowing
the same component to be applied without modification to any policy. Conversely, the selection and
parameterization of these components must be conditioned on both the base task 𝑡and the observed
behavior of the policy 𝜋. We therefore introduce the task-policy-conditioned map H:
𝐸′ = H (𝐸, 𝑡; 𝜋) = (𝑤𝑘◦𝑤𝑘−1 ◦· · · ◦𝑤1)(𝐸),
(6)
where each 𝑤𝑖is a customized EnvHarness component designed to wrap the base environment
𝐸and expose the critical weaknesses of 𝜋on task 𝑡. Rather than inspecting internal model weights,
these components treat the agent as a black box and operate solely on its outputs to generate a steady,
corrective training signal.
3.2. EnvRigger
We introduce EnvRigger to realize the task-policy-conditioned map H of Eq. (6). EnvRigger
runs 𝜋in the environment on task 𝑡, analyzes the resulting trajectories, writes specific EnvHarness
components to customize the environment for this task, and validates the customized environment
using fresh policy rollouts. Candidates from customized environments that provide an appropriate
learning signal are accepted, while the EnvHarness components of unsuccessful candidates are
rejected or revised. Figure 4 illustrates this complete workflow, in which EnvRigger operates
systematically through four distinct stages: Observe, Diagnose, Write, and Validate. To ensure that
the initial state mutations introduced by Stage can be reliably reproduced, we assume the base
environment supports deterministic resets during the validation phase.
Observe.
The EnvRigger begins by running the policy 𝜋on the base task 𝑡in the current en-
vironment to collect and analyze a batch of rollout trajectories. While failures expose the specific
weaknesses to be addressed within this task, successes help define the boundaries of these flaws,
showing which capabilities are already intact and where they begin to fail.
Diagnose.
EnvRigger analyzes the collected trajectories to identify the root causes of the ob-
served behaviors, focusing on systemic issues such as repetitive action loops, failures in parsing long
observations, or misread tool constraints. This diagnosis also determines the customization direction.
For a struggling policy, the goal is to scaffold missing steps and simplify the task. Conversely, if the
policy achieves a perfect success rate, it indicates the current environment is too forgiving to expose
6

===== PAGE 7 =====
EnvHarness : Awakening Static Worlds for Agent Learning
Figure 4 | EnvRigger generating EnvHarness components for a target policy based on given task.
The execution loop on the left runs the policy against the current environment, which is a frozen base
environment wrapped by the active EnvHarness containing accepted components 𝑤1, . . . , 𝑤𝑘, while
the resulting rollout trajectories feed the EnvRigger loop on the right. The EnvRigger operates
systematically through four distinct stages: Observe, Diagnose, Write, and Validate, where the last
two steps form a write-and-validate loop that generates a candidate component, evaluates it on fresh
rollouts, and revises it upon failure.
any remaining weaknesses. Under this scenario, the EnvRigger diagnoses that the environment
must be made harder, shifting the customization to inject more challenging scenarios that force the
policy’s potential flaws into the open. EnvRigger then outputs these findings as a textual diagnosis.
Write.
Based on the diagnosis, EnvRigger synthesizes one or more EnvHarness components
to target the identified flaws. A single flaw may require combining multiple components, such as a
Stage that customizes the initial state and a Contract that filters subsequent interactions, emitted
together as a candidate set. For example, if the diagnosis reveals that the policy relies on a fragile
shortcut that bypasses learning, EnvRigger can write a Contract that blocks this action under
specific conditions, forcing the policy to explore and master the intended skills.
Validate.
To evaluate the candidate components from the Write stage, EnvRigger wraps the
current environment with them to instantiate 𝐸′ and runs fresh rollouts of 𝜋on the base task 𝑡.
Based on some trajectory metrics, like the success rate and failure distribution, EnvRigger analyzes
these fresh rollouts to decide between three validation behaviors: accepting the candidate, rejecting
those that are unsolvable or non-challenging, or refining candidates with poorly scaled signals. If
the candidate requires refinement, the trajectories and scaling feedback flow back into the Write
stage, repeating this Write-and-Validate loop until a candidate is accepted or the revision budget is
exhausted. All accepted components are ultimately added to the EnvHarness. The exact system
prompt and decision-making criteria guiding these validation actions are detailed in Appendix A.
7

===== PAGE 8 =====
EnvHarness : Awakening Static Worlds for Agent Learning
4. Experiments
4.1. Experimental Setup
In this section, we mainly focus on the skill-based learning paradigm, where skills are extracted from
environments to improve agent capabilities. We also evaluate the compatibility and performance of
our framework under the online reinforcement learning paradigm, which is presented as part of our
broader analysis in Section 5.
Benchmarks and Evaluation.
We evaluate our framework on five benchmarks spanning four distinct
domains: ALFWorld (Shridhar et al., 2020) for text-based embodied environments, WebArena (Zhou
et al., 2024) for web interaction, SWE-bench Verified (Jimenez et al., 2024) for software engineering,
and OfficeQA (Databricks, 2025) with SpreadsheetBench (Ma et al., 2024) for office automation.
We report each benchmark’s native metrics, additionally tracking the average steps on SWE-bench
Verified as a measure of execution efficiency. Training and evaluation episodes are strictly disjoint on
every benchmark, with detailed split configurations provided in Appendix E.1.
Importantly, EnvRigger and the policy agent utilize the same model backbone on each bench-
mark: Gemini-3.1-Flash-Lite for ALFWorld and WebArena, and Gemini-3.5-Flash elsewhere, ensuring
that performance gains do not stem from distilling a stronger external model. On each training
set, EnvRigger executes the optimization loop of Section 3 to generate EnvHarness-customized
environments. We then extract skills from trajectories collected in these environments following
ReasoningBank (Ouyang et al., 2025), and evaluate the skill-equipped policy agent on the held-out
instances. We exclude the Chain component from this automated pipeline because it is difficult for
EnvRigger to observe the internal states of joined environments. Instead, we analyze the effect of
chaining separately in Section 5.
Baseline Methods.
We compare EnvHarness against four skill sources: No Skills (the frozen
policy agent alone), Original Envs (skills from original environments to isolate reshaping effects), and
GenEnv (Guo et al., 2025), VeriEnv (Chae et al., 2026), or SWE-smith (Yang et al., 2026a) for their
respective benchmarks. While these baseline generators are domain-specific, EnvHarness applies
generically across all domains via a unified interface, including the office automation environments
where no generation baseline exists. To ensure a fair comparison, all baselines share the same seed
instances, environment count, extraction pipeline, and policy model. EnvRigger operates strictly on
training episodes under the same oracle verification access, and each evaluation instance is attempted
once. Baseline details are in Appendix E.2.
4.2. Main Results
Table 2 and Table 3 summarize the primary results across five benchmarks. Based on these evaluations,
we present the following key observations.
EnvHarness delivers consistent gains where static environments cannot.
Skills acquired in
environments customized by EnvHarness consistently outperform those extracted from original
environments on every benchmark, yielding up to a 9.0-point improvement on ALFWorld. Conversely,
extracting skills from static base environments can actually degrade performance; for instance, on
SpreadsheetBench, skills from unmodified environments fall below the no-skill baseline, while on
SWE-bench Verified, they lengthen execution trajectories. Because static environments only allow
8

===== PAGE 9 =====
EnvHarness : Awakening Static Worlds for Agent Learning
Table 2 | Performance of agents equipped with skills extracted from different environment sources on
ALFWorld and WebArena. All numbers are the mean over three independent runs, with standard
deviations as gray subscripts. Higher is better for every metric, and the last row reports the improve-
ment of EnvHarness Envs over Original Envs. “–” denotes that the method is benchmark-specific
and cannot be applied to the other domain.
Skill Source
ALFWorld
WebArena
In-Dist
OOD
Avg.
Reddit
Shopping
Shop Admin
GitLab
Avg.
No Skills
62.6 1.7
60.7 5.2
61.7 3.4
39.6 2.3
35.2 3.3
44.1 2.3
35.8 8.4
38.7 2.3
Original Envs
63.3 2.8
61.4 4.3
62.4 3.4
38.7 9.7
35.2 1.3
44.6 3.0
35.4 4.0
38.5 3.1
GenEnv
63.3 1.2
61.9 2.7
62.6 1.9
–
–
–
–
–
VeriEnv
–
–
–
39.6 4.2
30.2 0.0
49.7 2.4
38.9 5.6
39.6 1.4
EnvHarness Envs
66.2 0.3
70.4 2.3
68.3 1.3
40.6 4.7
37.4 0.3
50.8 1.5
37.7 3.1
41.6 1.8
Improvement
+2.9
+9.0
+5.9
+1.9
+2.2
+6.2
+2.3
+3.1
Table 3 | Performance of agents equipped with skills extracted from different environment sources on
SWE-bench Verified, OfficeQA, and SpreadsheetBench. Standard deviations are gray subscripts. “–”
denotes that the method is benchmark-specific and cannot be applied to the other domain.
Skill Source
SWE-verified
OfficeQA
SpreadsheetBench
SR (↑)
Average Step (↓)
EM (↑)
F1 (↑)
Pass@1 (↑)
Mean Score (↑)
No Skills
47.67 0.93
53.58 2.93
54.23 2.84
55.77 2.98
46.44 0.15
61.32 0.37
Original Envs
49.88 2.59
55.01 1.69
54.40 1.84
55.77 1.59
45.88 1.19
61.47 0.59
SWE-smith
50.12 1.74
54.72 2.03
–
–
–
–
EnvHarness Envs
52.58 2.72
49.61 2.49
56.20 2.34
57.73 2.29
49.15 0.36
62.48 0.27
Improvement
+2.70
+5.40
+1.80
+1.96
+3.27
+1.01
the agent to practice behaviors it already executes, they fail to address its specific limitations, often
retrieving redundant or suboptimal skills. In contrast, the write-and-validate loop of EnvRigger only
commits environment components verified by fresh policy trajectories, ensuring that EnvHarness
consistently improves upon the no-skill baseline across all benchmarks.
EnvHarness generalizes across domains through a domain-agnostic interface.
The underlying
interface protocol, EnvRigger loop, and the skill extraction pipeline apply consistently across all
five benchmarks, requiring only domain-specific prompt templates to adapt to different environments.
By contrast, specialized generation baselines are constrained to their specific target benchmarks
(indicated by dashes for inapplicable domains in Tables 2 and 3). Nevertheless, EnvHarness
consistently outperforms these specialized baselines wherever they can be applied. On ALFWorld,
EnvHarness skills surpass GenEnv by 5.7 points on average and by 8.5 points in out-of-distribution
settings, where generic instance generation merely increases repetitive practice without addressing
policy weaknesses. On SWE-bench Verified, EnvHarness outperforms the purpose-built SWE-smith
by 2.46 points in success rate while requiring 5.11 fewer execution steps per episode. Targeting
diagnosed vulnerabilities through a unified interface thus proves superior to merely scaling up the
quantity of training episodes through domain-specific generation.
EnvHarness improves efficiency by repairing wasteful behaviors.
On SWE-bench Verified,
skills extracted from EnvHarness-customized environments reduce the average steps per episode
from 53.6 to 49.6, whereas skills from unmodified environments actually increase it to 55.0. This
9

===== PAGE 10 =====
EnvHarness : Awakening Static Worlds for Agent Learning
efficiency gain directly correlates with the specific diagnostics from EnvRigger: targeted Contracts
and Stages designed to disrupt repetitive action loops and filter verbose observations successfully
shorten execution trajectories.
5. Analysis
We analyze EnvHarness along five dimensions: its compatibility as a training signal for rein-
forcement learning, its scaling efficiency compared to standard dataset expansion, its transferability
across different policy model families and strengths, the unique value of the Chain component on
long-horizon environments, and the capability of the EnvRigger to accept explicit, user-defined
target constraints. Additional analyses are reported in Appendix G.
ALFWorld
WebShop
Training Set
In-Dist OOD Avg. Score
SR
Original Envs
81.4
89.6 85.5
75.6
66.0
EnvHarness Envs
87.9
88.8 88.4
79.2
67.4
Table 4 | Reinforcement learning on ALFWorld and Web-
Shop, comparing policies trained on the original environ-
ments and on EnvHarness environments. ALFWorld
is scored by success rate on in-distribution and held-out
instance types; WebShop reports environment score and
success rate.
EnvHarness enables better RL.
Be-
yond skill-based learning, we investigate
whether EnvHarness-customized envi-
ronments can provide active training sig-
nals in online reinforcement learning. We
perform this analysis on ALFWorld and
WebShop (Yao et al., 2022a) using Qwen3-
8B-base (Yang et al., 2025) as the policy,
optimized via Group Relative Policy Opti-
mization (GRPO) (Shao et al., 2024); train-
ing details are provided in Appendix F.1.
We train two distinct policies: one trained
solely on the original static environments,
and one trained entirely on environments reshaped by EnvHarness, evaluating both on the same
held-out instances. Table 4 reports the results. Training on EnvHarness environments consistently
improves policy performance, outperforming the baseline trained solely on original environments on
three out of four metrics. Specifically, on ALFWorld, EnvHarness Envs achieves an in-distribution
success rate of 87.9 compared to 81.4 for original environments. On WebShop, it achieves a higher
score of 79.2 (versus 75.6) and success rate of 67.4 (versus 66.0). Although there is a slight, negligible
trade-off in the ALFWorld OOD success rate (88.8 versus 89.6), the overall results underscore a
fundamental advantage: the reshaped environments are not merely auxiliary data but provide a
highly effective, independent optimization signal for online policy learning.
SR (%) ↑
AS ↓
No Skills
47.67
53.58
Original Envs
49.88
55.01
EnvHarness (Stage/Contract Only)
52.58
49.61
EnvHarness (Chain Only)
49.63
41.96
Combined Skills (Stage/Contract + Chain)
54.30
43.12
Table 5 | Performance on long-horizon environments. SR
stands for Success Rate, and AS represents Average Steps.
Chain enables efficient long-hori-
zon task solving.
Real-world appli-
cations often require agents to op-
erate over extended horizons. The
Chain component addresses this by
joining two randomly paired base en-
vironments into a single, extended
episode. To isolate its effect, this pair-
ing operates independently of the au-
tonomous EnvRigger loop. We eval-
uate the extracted skills on standard single-environment test instances, reporting Success Rate (SR)
and Average Steps (AS) in Table 5.
10

===== PAGE 11 =====
EnvHarness : Awakening Static Worlds for Agent Learning
Skills from Chain environments yield substantial efficiency gains, reducing AS from 53.58 to
41.96. Their standalone SR (49.63) is marginally below the 49.88 baseline. This aligns with their
stringent training condition—where success requires solving both halves—which prioritizes long-term
goal preservation over short-task maximization. Combining both skill sets (Stage/Contract +
Chain) achieves the best of both worlds: the highest SR (54.30) and excellent efficiency (43.12 AS),
demonstrating highly complementary behaviors. Representative skills are in Appendix F.3.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Number of Environments
48
50
52
54
56
Resolved Rate (%)
Generated envs
Original envs
EnvHarness envs (ours)
47.7
54.8
52.1
50.4
Figure 5 | Environment scaling on SWE-bench Ver-
ified. All three sources supply the same number
of environments and feed the same extraction and
retrieval protocol.
EnvHarness enables efficient environment
scaling.
Environment scaling evaluates perfor-
mance as the available training environments ex-
pand, comparing three allocation strategies un-
der an identical budget: EnvHarness environ-
ments, unmodified benchmark environments,
and SWE-smith generated environments. Hold-
ing the policy model, environment budget, and
skill retrieval protocol fixed, each batch of 50
environments yields one skill bank (alternating
between 2 and 3 skills per bank, totaling 15
skills at 300 environments). Crucially, while
both baselines draw environment batches inde-
pendently of the learner, EnvHarness synthe-
sizes each batch specifically targeting the policy equipped with previously accumulated skills, enabling
the environments and the policy to co-evolve. As shown in Figure 5, EnvHarness climbs from 47.67
to 54.79 (a 7.12-point gain) and maintains an upward trajectory at 300 environments. In contrast,
the same budget yields only 52.13 on original environments and 50.37 on generated ones. This
performance gap confirms that targeting the learner’s current capability boundary is fundamentally
more effective than unconditioned environment scaling. Representative skills from each round are
provided in Appendix F.2.
Gemini 3.1
Flash-Lite
Qwen3.6
27B
Gemini 3.5
Flash
Claude
Sonnet 4.6
30
40
50
60
70
Success Rate (%)
30.7
36.8
40.0
41.0
48.4
52.1
47.7
49.9
52.6
67.2
69.2
72.4
No skills
Skills from original envs
Skills from EnvHarness envs
+8.7%
+7.6%
+5.4%
+4.6%
Figure 6 | Cross-model results on SWE-bench Verified.
Each group represents one policy model, ordered from
weakest to strongest. Bars show success rates with no
skills, with skills from unmodified environments, and
with skills from EnvHarness environments. Percent-
ages represent relative gains over original environments.
EnvHarness generalizes across differ-
ent LLM backbones.
To evaluate gener-
alizability, we test four distinct models on
SWE-bench Verified: Gemini 3.1 Flash-Lite,
Qwen3.6 27B (Qwen Team, 2026), Gem-
ini 3.5 Flash, and Claude Sonnet 4.6 (An-
thropic, 2026a). These span open-weight
and proprietary architectures across a wide
capability spectrum. In each setting, we
use the same model backbone for both the
target policy and the EnvRigger to keep
the setup consistent, while the extraction
pipeline and protocol remain unchanged.
Figure 6 shows the results. EnvHar-
ness skills outperform real environment
skills on all four policies, by 2.7 to 3.7 ab-
solute points, even though the skill-free success rates span a broad range from 30.7 to 67.2. The size
of this gain is largely independent of how strong the underlying policy is: the customization loop
neither breaks down on the weakest model nor saturates on the strongest, and the same pipeline,
11

===== PAGE 12 =====
EnvHarness : Awakening Static Worlds for Agent Learning
prompts, and acceptance criteria are used throughout. What the policy’s capability level appears to
change is the content of the diagnoses rather than the applicability of the loop. We note that skills of
either kind help the two weakest policies most relative to no skills at all (+9.3 and +11.1 points for
EnvHarness, and +6.1 and +7.4 for unmodified environments, versus under 5.5 points for the two
strongest).
EnvHarness produces environments on demand.
While the EnvRigger loop autonomously
identifies training targets via behavioral diagnosis in standard settings, the same machinery can
readily accept explicit, user-defined constraints. We evaluate two classes of constraints. The first is a
quantitative target (success rate or average steps) for an objective performance metric in Appendix G.
The second constraint targets capability weaknesses described in natural language. For example,
given the weakness below, the EnvRigger generates a Contract that rejects code submissions
unless tests are run. This forces the agent to verify its fixes. From the resulting trajectories, we distill
the skill shown below. Rather than overfitting to a single task, the skill combines a general principle
with actionable steps, perfectly matching our requirement for a skill (Yang et al., 2026b).
Specified weakness
The policy submits a patch without running the failing test, so the fix stays unverified.
Generated component (Contract, 𝑓𝑇axis)
class _Contract(Contract):
def modify_transition(self, action, response, env_state):
cmd = bash_command(action)
if "pytest" in cmd or "runtests.py" in cmd:
env_state.extras["ran_tests"] = True
if is_submission(cmd) \
and not env_state.extras.get("ran_tests"):
return failed(response,
"githook: pre-commit hook ’verify-tests’ "
"failed. Run the test suite before submitting.")
return response
Verification-Driven Development Loop
Description: Whenever a code change is made to fix a bug or implement a feature, especially where the
test suite needs setup or configuration.
Content: Before finalizing any change, run the relevant test suite to confirm the failure exists, then run it
again after the patch to verify the fix, initializing the environment first when needed.
6. Related Work
6.1. Environment Scaling
Environment scaling has emerged as a research direction that supplies agents with more environments
to learn from (Huang et al., 2025b; Xi et al., 2025). Existing efforts scale environments in various
forms, including simulating environments and their feedback with an LLM (Guo et al., 2025; Wang
et al., 2025; Zala et al., 2024), up to world models that simulate or synthesize whole families of
12

===== PAGE 13 =====
EnvHarness : Awakening Static Worlds for Agent Learning
agentic environments (Wang et al., 2026; Zuo et al., 2026), synthesizing executable environments
programmatically (Chae et al., 2026; Dong et al., 2026; Song et al., 2026; Sun et al., 2026; Tang
et al., 2026), and synthesizing new task instances inside an existing benchmark (Pan et al., 2024;
Yang et al., 2026a). Beyond producing more tasks, another line adapts what the environment presents
to the learner, from curriculum generation in reinforcement learning (Dennis et al., 2020; Jiang
et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2026; Wang et al., 2019) to hand-designed corrective feedback and reward
shaping (Lu et al., 2025). Different from previous works that rely on benchmark-specific pipelines
or hand-designed curricula, EnvHarness reshapes an existing environment through one interface
shared across benchmarks, conditions the reshaping on the diagnosed weaknesses of the current
policy, and leaves tasks and verifiers untouched.
6.2. Self-Evolving Agent
Self-evolving agents improve themselves from their own experience without additional human super-
vision (Fang et al., 2025). Existing efforts evolve different parts of the agent, including prompts and
reflections (Madaan et al., 2023; Shinn et al., 2023), skill and workflow libraries (Huang et al., 2026b;
Wang et al., 2023, 2024; Xia et al., 2026a,b; Yang et al., 2026b), experience memory distilled from
past trajectories (Ouyang et al., 2025; Zhao et al., 2024), the model weights through self-generated
rewards or self-proposed tasks (He et al., 2025; Huang et al., 2025a, 2026a; Xia et al., 2025; Yuan
et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2026), and recently the agent harness itself, rewritten and tested around
a frozen model (Lee et al., 2026b). Different from these methods that evolve the agent while the
world it learns from stays fixed, EnvHarness reshapes the environment itself against the diagnosed
weaknesses of a frozen policy.
7. Conclusion
We introduce EnvHarness, a programmable layer that turns a static, existing environment into a
controllable one. EnvHarness wraps a frozen benchmark with three plug-in components, Stage,
Contract, and Chain, and reshapes it entirely through the standard reset/step interface, making it
possible to isolate a skill, extend a task’s horizon, or calibrate difficulty in environments that were
never built for any of these purposes. Since EnvHarness never touches internal code, a single
implementation works seamlessly across different domains. Furthermore, by leaving the original
tasks unchanged, every reshaped environment safely retains its trusted, human-built verifier. To
fully automate this customization, we introduce EnvRigger, an autonomous loop that diagnoses
policy weaknesses from execution trajectories and synthesizes targeted EnvHarness components
to provide precise learning signals. This reframes environment construction as a wrapping problem
rather than an authoring one, and suggests a practical pathway toward scalable environment supply
for agent learning. We present future directions and limitations in Appendix I and Appendix H.
References
Anthropic.
Effective harnesses for long-running agents.
https://www.anthropic.com/
engineering/effective-harnesses-for-long-running-agents, 2025. Accessed: 2026-
07-07.
Anthropic.
Claude 4.6 sonnet.
https://www.anthropic.com/news/claude-sonnet-4-6,
2026a. Accessed: 2026-07-28.
13
