ueaj
Machine Learning
Directions
Inference
assets
Fast Min-P
Masquerade
Prompt Ensembles
Metrics
Multimodal
Post-training
Predictions
Pretraining
Research Ideas
Scaling Laws
The Spaces
Theory
Introduction
Paper Reading List
Philosophy
Software
Project Help List
Welcome
Masquerade

This is a handwritten recap of an artifact fable made, it basically oneshot this project with a fairly detailed prompt. It starts with a repro of DSpark and then moves on to the rest of the project. It's a little more thorough than what I have here. Code can be found here

DSpark and DFlash use a separate drafter model from the main one, there are a number of problems with this.

It's generally more efficient to just shove everything into one big model.
If your reasoning traces are easily predicted by a shitty 1B model, then they probably aren't very dense or optimized, so I doubt DSpark will have high acceptance ratios past a certain point. If your tokens are really predictable, you're probably wasting a lot of compute!

So what about just putting the specdec into the main model? It'd be way more flops since it's 2x forward passes instead of 1x on the smaller draft + 1x on the target. But using the same, larger, base model should improve the acceptance ratio by a lot, and this will likely matter more with denser reasoning traces.

TL;DR results mixed on existing inefficient models as predicted, probably better for denser reasoning traces

Flash Distillation 

To accomplish this feat a method is needed to inline the masked prediction objective into the regular NTP model. This can be done by masking parts of the sequence like in a diffusion model, and then distilling the logits from the unmasked sequence into the masked one on the whole sequence (to stabilize the model). We then add a markov chain head like in DSpark to enhance prediction coherence, but fundamentally it's the same idea.

Stable Flash Distillation 


The most trivial way is to simply take on policy rollouts, mask a bunch of tokens with [MASK] and then distill the logits from the unmasked sequence with the original model into the masked one with our student model. This works and it's what I did first:

This was a simple test on qwen .6B, we scaled up to 4B for the later methods

Unstable Flash Distillation 

The riskier but more memory efficient method is to live distill the model into itself, you can do this in a surprisingly efficient way. You can combine the masked and unmasked sequence into one sequence, and reset the RoPE and use attention masks to prevent later positions attending to the mask tokens, and letting the mask tokens attend to everything other than mask tokens from prior blocks. This also allows you to mask multiple parts of the sequence at the same time, as opposed to just one like in "Stable Flash Distillation".

Results 

This too, works as well

A few ablations like turning up the LR on the markov head and [MASK] tokens helped a lot with acceptance ratio. We also ran the test on qwen-4B so we could have a direct comparison against DSpark, and while DSpark had a 
𝜏
 of 5.64, we were able to go all the way up to 6.77 with minimal tuning and no degradation to GSM8K performance.


On net however, while we do get a solid 2x speedup across the board compared to NTP, it's still quite a bit slower than DSpark. This is to be expected, the whole point is that this approach is probably better only when reasoning efficiency is improved but that's something that needs to be tested and requires more time with fable and compute than I have available to me.

The code for the project can be found here

Bonus: Pretraining objective 

A fun bonus is to try and use this as a auxiliary pretraining objective, this way you get out a model natively good at the task, but also it might potentially accelerate learning by the same mechanism MTP does: it teaches the model to plan multiple tokens ahead much earlier than it would learn to do so naturally.

Unfortunately I have more important things to work on to actually test this idea but from preliminary results it seems rather inconclusive. I will probably test this more later.


Masquerade
INTERACTIVE GRAPH
ON THIS PAGE
Flash Distillation
Stable Flash Distillation
Unstable Flash Distillation
Results
Bonus: Pretraining objective
Powered by Obsidian Publish