
	
		Microsoft Frontier Company: AI engineering that amplifies and protects your intelligence			
				
					
						Jul 2, 2026
					
					|					
	Judson Althoff - CEO, Microsoft Commercial Business
				
			
		
								
							
  

								
								

	
	
		The pace of AI adoption is moving incredibly fast. Customers have moved well beyond experimentation and understand the importance of adopting AI to transform their business. They are now concentrating on delivering measurable business outcomes and demonstrating a return on their AI investments, while ensuring their intelligence is amplified and their IP is protected.
Today we are introducing Microsoft Frontier Company, a new operating business focused on delivering Frontier Transformation through AI for our customers around the world. It will provide a unique combination of skills inclusive of deep industry knowledge, change management and continuous improvement experience, and enterprise-grade AI engineering expertise. This goes beyond what has been labeled as Forward Deployed Engineering (FDE) and will be the largest, most capable, outcome-driven engineering organization in the industry. We are making a $2.5B investment in Microsoft Frontier Company, embedding 6,000 industry and engineering experts at customers to co-design, co-innovate, deploy and continuously improve AI systems at scale based on measurable business outcomes.
I recently wrote more about my conviction that Intelligence + Trust are the two most important components of any AI solution and how our customers can use different levers to manage cost.
Companies need to establish an intelligence platform so their unique IQ — their proprietary data, expertise, workflows and decision-making processes — compounds over time from within, using their choice of models to build AI solutions and workflows.
They need a trusted platform that allows them to observe, govern, manage and secure AI solutions across every layer of the technology stack, using FinOps to assess their ROI.
Enterprise AI engineering expertise with deep industry knowledge is required to build a system that acts as a continuous loop of improvement between the two platforms to fine tune agentic business processes, ensuring that a customer’s intelligence compounds over time and delivers real business outcomes.
This is what Microsoft Frontier Company was built to do: focus on end-to-end Frontier Transformation, enabling customers to amplify their IQ with AI while refining their differentiated value in the markets that they serve.
Early results demonstrate meaningful impact: Our engineers and industry experts partnered with LSEG (London Stock Exchange Group) to embed AI into LSEG Workspace, helping finance professionals ask complex questions and get quick answers across structured and unstructured financial content. The solution is underpinned by a foundation that is iteratively refined through client feedback and real-time user testing that accelerates each cycle and steadily improves model quality and scope. From LSEG to Land O’Lakes to Unilever to Novo Nordisk, our differentiated approach is already delivering measurable outcomes on our customers’ Frontier Transformation journeys.
To achieve scale, we will work closely with our partner ecosystem to extend this unique value to our customers across all markets and segments globally. We have robust FDE partnerships with our Global SI partners, including Accenture, Capgemini, EY, KPMG, PwC and others.
Central to this approach is a principle that is non-negotiable: a customer’s IQ is protected. Their data, their IP, their competitive advantage — none of it is used to train models in ways that commoditize what differentiates them in their industry. Satya put it clearly recently: there is no societal permission for an AI future that eats the intelligence of the companies it’s deployed inside. We built Microsoft Frontier Company to make sure that does not happen.
We protect that intelligence with a model-diverse, open, heterogeneous AI platform. Customers shouldn’t be locked into a single model any more than they should be locked into a single technology vendor. Microsoft’s platform gives organizations the flexibility to run the right model for each scenario — whether it comes from OpenAI, Anthropic, Microsoft AI, open source or a specialized model tuned for a specific industry — without ceding control to any one of them.
To lead this new organization, I have asked Rodrigo Kede Lima to be the President of Microsoft Frontier Company. Rodrigo brings 30 years of industry experience, and for the past six at Microsoft has led enterprise-wide transformations as a sales leader in the Americas and Asia. He has been at the forefront of helping customers and partners translate technology shifts into business outcomes, and understanding how platform innovation, engineering and partner ecosystem collaboration come together to drive growth.
I am excited about all the things that Microsoft Frontier Company will do for our customers to realize the gains of Frontier Transformation. At the end of the day, it comes down to Intelligence + Trust and empowering our customers to achieve meaningful outcomes and a return on their investments.
Learn more at www.microsoft.com/en-us/frontier-company.
Judson Althoff is the chief executive officer of Microsoft Commercial Business. He is responsible for the product strategy, sales, services, support, marketing, operations and revenue growth of the company’s commercial business, which operates in more than 120 regional and national subsidiaries globally.
Tags: AI, Frontier Transformation, Microsoft Frontier Company	

