Grouped Value Attention: Efficient KV Caching via
On-Demand Key Reconstruction
Vishesh Tripathi* Abhay Kumar * Ramsha Khan†
FrontiersMind
Abstract
The KV cache is a primary bottleneck for Transformer decoding: its memory footprint and
cache-read traffic grow with sequence length. Grouped-query attention (GQA) reduces this cost
by sharing key–value heads, but still stores both a key and a value at every step. We introduce
Grouped Value Attention (GVA), which stores grouped values and reconstructs content keys with a
learned linear map. At inference, the map can be absorbed into the query, eliminating the need
to materialize content keys in the intended decode path. A small shared decoupled RoPE channel
retains positional information through a separately cached positional key. For the configurations
studied, this representation reduces persistent cache scalars by approximately 45–47% relative to
matched GQA. At the 350M-parameter scale with 30B FineWeb-Edu tokens, the 16-dimensional
positional variant reaches 44.35 average accuracy across five tasks, compared with 44.36 for GQA
and 43.88 for MLA. These results demonstrate near-GQA benchmark accuracy with a more compact
cache representation. To translate this compact representation into faster autoregressive inference,
we have developed custom decoding kernels and are currently evaluating their end-to-end inference
performance with an open-source release planned soon.
1 Introduction
The Transformer computes attention from query, key, and value representations [1]. In autoregressive
decoding only the newest query is required, while the keys and values of all preceding tokens are reused.
Implementations therefore keep a KV cache. Its size grows linearly with context length and often
becomes a dominant capacity and bandwidth cost in long-context serving [2, 7].
Grouped-query attention (GQA) reduces this cost by sharing key–value heads across groups of query
heads [3]. GQA still writes both a key and a value at every step, so the cache remains two streams.
Multi-head latent attention (MLA) compresses keys and values into a joint latent [4]. That shrinks the
cache further, at the price of an extra projection and a more involved decode path.
We introduce Grouped Value Attention (GVA). GVA stores only the grouped values and reconstructs
keys from them with a learned linear map,K =VM . Here and below,K =VM is shorthand for the
single-head relationKh =Vg(h)Mh, whereg(h)is the value group assigned to query headh. Values
already carry the content delivered to the attention output; the map selects the features used for scoring.
Because the map is fixed at inference, it can be absorbed into the query: the content score against each
cached position is a single inner product with the stored value, so the intended decode path need not
∗First authors: Vishesh Tripathi and Abhay Kumar.
†Second author: Ramsha Khan.
{vishesh.tripathi,a.kumar,ramsha.khan}@frontiersmind.ai
1
write a full content-key stream. GVA uses one reconstruction map per query head to give query heads
within a value group distinct content-key representations.
Standard RoPE applied to the reconstructed key breaks this absorption. The rotation depends on
the cached position and cannot be folded into a single transformed query, requiring either position-
dependent key reconstruction or a full key cache. We therefore use a small shared decoupled RoPE
channel, following DeepSeek MLA [4]: an unrotated content slice reconstructed from the stored value,
plus a short rotated slice shared across heads. Position is retained without restoring a full key cache.
Because the positional key is shared, it adds only a few dimensions per token.
The systems case is direct. Token-by-token decoding repeatedly reads the attention cache and is
often limited by memory bandwidth. GVA targets faster, more memory-efficient autoregressive inference
by reducing the intended persistent cache by approximately 45–47% relative to matched GQA. Prefill
remains dominated by parallel matrix operations, so GVA may stay close to GQA there; neither latency
nor decode-throughput gains are established by the present experiments. Compared with MLA, GVA
uses the value itself as the persistent content state rather than a separate joint latent, preserving a
direct value path.
Figure 1 provides an overview of the attention caching strategies and GVA’s value-only content
cache.
Our contributions are:
• Grouped Value Attention, which caches grouped values and reconstructs keys with a linear map that
is absorbed into the query at inference.
• A small shared decoupled RoPE channel that keeps positional encoding compatible with this recon-
struction, at a few extra cached dimensions per token.
• The proposed decoupled-RoPE GVA representation reduces cache scalars by approximately 45–47%;
its 16-dimensional positional variant reaches 44.35 average accuracy, close to GQA at 44.36 and MLA
at 43.88 with benchmark scores averaged over three runs using different random seeds.
Values
Keys
Queries
Multi-Head Attention
Values
Keys
Queries
Grouped-Query Attention
Values
Keys
Queries
Multi-Query Attention
Values
Keys
Queries
Multi-Head Latent Attention
Values
Keys
Queries
Grouped-Value Attention
Compressed
Latent
Projection
Figure 1: Attention caching strategies for eight query heads. GVA caches four grouped values and
reconstructs content keys asK =VM . The depicted content cache is half the size of matched GQA;
including the shared positional key, the total intended cache is approximately 45–47% smaller for the
configurations studied.
2
2 Related Work
Notation.Let H be the number of query heads,G the number of key–value groups,dh the head
width, andT the cached length. Per layer and sequence, multi-head attention stores separate keys and
values for each head [1, 2]:
NMHA = 2THd h.(1)
Multi-query attention.Autoregressive decoding is limited by the bandwidth of loading keys and
values at every step [2]. Multi-query attention (MQA) keeps H query heads but a single shared
key–value head (G=1) [2]. The cache is
NMQA = 2Td h,(2)
a factor ofH smaller than multi-head attention. That speeds up decoding, at the cost of quality and,
in some settings, training stability [2, 3].
Grouped-query attention.GQA interpolates between multi-head attention and MQA: query heads
are split intoGgroups, and each group shares one key–value head [3]. The cache is
NGQA = 2TGd h.(3)
The casesG=H andG=1recover multi-head attention and MQA [3]. With a modestG, GQA achieves
quality close to multi-head attention and speed close to MQA in the experiments of Ainslie et al. [3]. It
is also used in open models such as Llama 2 70B [16].
Multi-head latent attention.DeepSeek MLA compresses keys and values into a low-rank latent of
widthd c, plus a small shared RoPE slice of widthdr, and caches that instead of full heads [4]:
NMLA =T(d c +d r).(4)
At decode time the key up-projection can be absorbed into the query projection so that attention need
not materialize a full content-key tensor [4]. GVA makes a different choice: the persistent state is the
value used in the weighted sum, and only the scoring representation is reconstructed,
K=VM.(5)
For decoupled-RoPE GVA, the persistent cache contains grouped values and a shared positional key of
widthd r, giving the scalar count per layer and sequence
NGV A=T(Gd h +d r).(6)
There is no extra latent projection on the cache path. Both designs keep a short RoPE channel outside
the absorbable map so position does not force a full key cache. MLA pays for compression with a
learned bottleneck; GVA pays with a linear map from value to key.
Grouped query experts.Grouped Query Experts (GQE) applies mixture-of-experts routing to
the query heads within each GQA group [17]. A router selects query-head experts per token while the
key–value heads remain dense and unchanged. GQE therefore reduces active query-head computation
while retaining GQA’s cache structure.
3
3 Grouped Value Attention
We hypothesize that the content key can be derived from the value, as both encode information about
the same underlying content, eliminating the need for a separate content-key cache.
GVA is built on GQA grouping:H query heads shareG value heads. Only the key changes. We
first reused the value as the key, then replaced that with a linear map from the stored value. We use
row vectors throughout this section;g(h)denotes the value group assigned to query headh.
3.1 Value-only cache andK h =V g(h)Mh
GQA caches both a grouped key and a grouped value. The two streams have the same shape, so the
simplest cut is to store one of them. Values must persist, because they are what attention aggregates.
Shared KV.Our first design dropped the key projection and setK =V. The cache is then exactly
half of GQA, but the training loss never recovered to the GQA baseline (Figure 3). One vector is asked
both to score and to be retrieved. We trained Lumma-0.6B using this initial shared-KV approach with
query normalization, which yielded a slight improvement over shared KV without query normalization,
and open-sourced it on Hugging Face as Lumma-0.6B-Base [19].
Linear reconstruction.We therefore keep a dedicated value and reconstruct a content key for each
query head,
Kh =V g(h)Mh, M h∈R dh×dn, h= 1,...,H.(7)
Here dn is the content-key width, withdn = dh when there is no positional slice. GVA uses one
reconstruction mapMh per query head. We writeM below, suppressing the head and group indices
when discussing a single head. There is no independent key projection. Only the grouped valuesVg(h) are
written to the content cache. Values carry the content delivered to the output;Mh selects the features
used for scoring. The per-head maps retain head-specific content keys at a small, sequence-independent
parameter cost.
Key diversity.With per-head maps, GVA caches G value streams but can produceH distinct
content-key streams through reconstruction. In GQA, every query head within a group scores against
the same key vector; GVA instead removes this key sharing and recovers head-specific key diversity
with a smaller persistent cache than GQA for the configurations studied. These keys remain linear
transforms of their grouped values, rather than unconstrained independent projections. This is an
advantage over GQA, not MLA: MLA also uses per-head key up-projections over a shared latent [4].
Table 1 summarizes the content-key and cache-stream counts.
Table 1: Head-specific content-key representations and persistent cache streams per layer. The shared
positional stream has widthdr.
Method Distinct content keys Cached streams
MHAH2H
GQAG2G
GVAH G(plus sharedk rope)
4
Initial scale.GQA obtains Q andK from separate projections of the same hidden state, so a common
initialization convention provides a reference for both scales rather than guaranteeing that they match.
In GVA,Kh =Vg(h)Mh is a projection of a projection; in our initial runs, default initialization ofMh
left keys well below queries in scale, producing nearly uniform attention and spending early training
recovering from this mismatch. We therefore initialize each map to match the initial RMS of content
keys and queries usingσM =σQ/(σV
√din), wheredin =dh is the value width contracted over by the
map andσQ is measured after any query normalization. Appendix A gives the derivation and its
assumptions.
3.2 Absorption at decode
BecauseM h is fixed at inference, the content key never has to be materialized. For query headh, the
content score against a cached positionjis
qhk⊤
j,h =q h(vj,g(h)Mh)⊤ = (q hM⊤
h )v⊤
j,g(h) = ˜qhv⊤
j,g(h),(8)
where ˜qh =qhM⊤
h is computed once per query token and head. Hereqh and kj,h denote the content
slices when a separate positional slice is present. We suppress the head and group indices in the
single-head expressions below. Content attention then reads only the value cache. This identity is exact.
In the fused decode formulation, attention uses˜qdirectly over the value cache, avoiding storage of a
temporary key tensor.
Standard RoPE on the query and reconstructed key breaks the absorption in(8). With head and
group indices suppressed, letqt denote the unrotated query at positiont. In row-vector notation,
qrot
t =q tR⊤
t , k rot
j = (v jM)R⊤
j ,
so the score is
qrot
t (krot
j )⊤ =q tR⊤
t RjM⊤v⊤
j =q tRj−tM⊤v⊤
j , R j−t =R⊤
t Rj.
The relative rotation depends on the query–key position pair and sits betweenqt andM⊤. Even for
a fixed query positiont, it varies with the cached positionj, so for a general learnedM it cannot be
folded into a single transformed query reused across all cached positions.
3.3 Decoupled RoPE
We split each query and key head into an unrotated content slice of widthdn and a rotated positional
slice of widthdr, while values retain widthdh. We adopt the decoupled RoPE strategy of DeepSeek
MLA [4]: RoPE is applied only to the positional slice, and the positional key is shared across heads:
knope
j,h =v j,g(h)Mh, M h∈R dh×dn,(9)
krope
j = (x jWr)R⊤
j , W r∈R dmodel×dr.(10)
The query is split the same way, with a per-head positional slice rotated byRt at query positiont.
Suppressing head and group indices, the score is
qk⊤
j =q nope(knope
j )⊤ +q rope(krope
j )⊤.(11)
The first term still absorbs:qnope(vjM )⊤ = (qnopeM⊤)v⊤
j . The second term uses the cached, already-
rotated krope
j . Nothing learned sits between the two rotations, so relative position is preserved. Because
krope is shared, it costsdr scalars per token, notGdr. The full query/key width used for score scaling
isd qk =d n +d r.
5
Algorithm 1One decode step of GVA with decoupled RoPE
Require:Current hidden statex t; mapsW Q,W V,W r,{M h}H
h=1; cachesV 1:t−1,g forg= 1,...,Gandk rope
1:t−1.
Ensure:Per-head attention outputs{o t,h}H
h=1.
1:q t←x tWQ; split each head intoqrope
t,h , qnope
t,h
2:v t←x tWV
3:foreach value groupg= 1,...,Gdo
4:V 1:t,g←[V 1:t−1,g;v t,g]
5:end for
6:k rope
t ←(x tWr)R⊤
t
7:k rope
1:t ←[k rope
1:t−1;k rope
t ]
8:foreach query headh= 1,...,Hdo
9:q rope
t,h ←q rope
t,h R⊤
t
10:˜q t,h←q nope
t,h M⊤
h {absorb; do not formKnope}
11:s t,h←˜qt,hV⊤
1:t,g(h) +q rope
t,h (krope
1:t )⊤
12:o t,h←softmax(s t,h/
p
dqk)V1:t,g(h)
13:end for
14:return{o t,h}H
h=1
3.4 Cache size
GQA stores two grouped streams,
NGQA = 2TGd h.(12)
Shared KV and GVA without a positional slice store only values,TGd h, exactly half. With decoupled
RoPE the persistent state is
NGV A=TGd h +Td r,(13)
so NGV A
NGQA
= 1
2 + dr
2Gdh
.(14)
The second term is a few percent for the widths we use, which is why we say GVAroughlyhalves the
GQA cache. Adding positional dimensions on top of the content width changes parameters and the
query/key width, not the form of(13): V staysdh-wide andkrope stays shared; any change indr is
accounted for by theTdr term.
The usual concatenation and output projection combine the per-head outputs. Training uses
the same content–position split with standard causal attention. Algorithm 1 describes the intended
decode path, and the cache count in(13) describes its persistent state rather than measured peak
serving memory. We have developed custom decoding kernels and are currently testing their inference
performance, with an open-source release planned soon.
4 Experiments
We train decoder-only Transformers from scratch at the 350M-parameter scale on a 30B-token sample
of FineWeb-Edu [8]. All models use the same data order, token budget, optimizer, and context length
unless a variant is named below. The GQA baseline uses grouped key–value heads; MLA and every
GVA run keep that query-head count so the comparison is on the cache representation, not on the
width of the query.
During pre-training, we used ZClip [18] to mitigate gradient spikes and help prevent loss spikes.
ZClip adaptively clips gradients using z-score-based anomaly detection on gradient norms.
6
4.1 Variants
Shared KV.The first cache cut sets K = V and stores only the grouped value. We report it as
a reference: the cache is exactly half of GQA, but the loss does not recover (Figure 3). It is not a
proposed system.
GQA and MLA.GQA caches grouped keys and values [3]. MLA caches a joint latent plus a shared
RoPE slice [4]. Both are trained with the same recipe as GVA.
GVA.GVA stores grouped values and reconstructs keys withKh =Vg(h)Mh, using one reconstruction
map per query head in all GVA variants. We compare:
•GVA baseline:linear reconstruction with a standard init ofM.
• GVA, scale-matched:M initialized soK and Q start at the same RMS (Appendix A), with query
RMSNorm.
• GVA, variance-fixed:the same init ofM, without query RMSNorm. This is our default GVA
without decoupled RoPE.
• GVA + decoupled RoPE:the default GVA plus a shared positional slice of widthdr∈{ 16, 24}
(Section 3.3).
Shared KV and GVA without decoupled RoPE apply ordinary RoPE to the reconstructed key. That
path cannot absorbM at decode; we still report it because it isolates the reconstruction from the
positional design.
4.2 Evaluation
We report language-model training loss over training steps, and zero-shot accuracy on HellaSwag [9],
WinoGrande [10], OpenBookQA [11], and the Easy and Challenge splits of ARC [13]. For each
configuration, we perform three runs, each using a different random seed, and report the arithmetic
mean of the three accuracies for each task. Average is the unweighted mean of these five task-level means.
Small differences should not be interpreted as statistically significant without assessing variability across
seeds.
Cache sizes follow Section 3.4: GQA stores2TGd h; shared KV and GVA without a rope slice store
TGd h; GVA with decoupled RoPE storesTGdh +Td r.
We have developed custom decoding kernels and are currently evaluating their end-to-end inference
performance, including fused decoding throughput, for comparison with MLA and GQA. These systems
measurements are not reported here; an open-source release is planned soon.
5 Results
Training loss.Figure 2 plots language-model loss for GQA, MLA, and the GVA variants. After
the initial transient, scale-matched GVA tracks GQA and MLA. The baseline GVA, with standard
initialization ofM, is worse early and narrows the gap later, consistent with the scale account in
Appendix A. Decoupled-RoPE runs follow the same broad trajectory; we do not observe a second
collapse onceMis scale-matched.
Shared KV.Figure 3 shows the first cut: K =V halves the GQA cache, but the loss stays above
GQA for the whole displayed run. A single vector does not recover the key/value split. All later GVA
runs keep a dedicated value and reconstruct the key.
7
Figure 2: Training loss on FineWeb-Edu for GQA, MLA, and GVA, plotted against training steps.
After initialization is scale-matched, GVA follows a similar trajectory to GQA. Shared KV is omitted
here; see Figure 3.
Downstream accuracy.Table 2 reports zero-shot accuracy averaged over three runs with different
random seeds for each configuration. Average is the unweighted mean of the five task-level mean
accuracies.
Scale-matched GVA with query RMSNorm is the strongest GVA row (44.41) and sits close to GQA
(44.36). The default without query RMSNorm is slightly lower (43.77) but remains close to MLA
(43.88). The GVA baseline without matched initialization reaches 43.91: reconstruction alone is already
in this band, and scale matching primarily improves early loss rather than consistently improving the
final average across variants.
Decoupled RoPE is the proposed serving design. Withdr=16, the average is 44.35, 0.01 percentage
points below GQA. Withdr=24, it is 44.29. We treatdr=16as the better operating point among
the two widths tested. These runs do not isolate the effects of positional width and content-width
allocation. Neither DRoPE row beats GQA on the average; the claim is a much smaller intended cache
Table 2: Accuracy (%) on five benchmarks, averaged over three runs with different random seeds for
each configuration. Average is the unweighted mean of the five task-level means. Bold marks the best
entry in each column.
Method HellaSwag WinoGrande OBQA ARC-E ARC-C Avg.
GQA43.4152.48 33.40 63.42 29.09 44.36
MLA 43.20 51.61 34.60 62.87 27.13 43.88
GVA baseline 42.12 52.9634.8061.95 27.73 43.91
GVA, scale-matched + Q-norm 42.0553.5134.40 62.7529.35 44.41
GVA, variance-fixed, no
Q-norm
42.71 53.35 32.20 62.33 28.24 43.77
GVA + DRoPEdr=2442.94 53.12 33.20 63.69 28.50 44.29
GVA + DRoPEdr=1642.69 53.35 33.6063.8128.32 44.35
8
Figure 3: Training loss for shared KV (K =V) against the GQA baseline. The cache is half of GQA,
but the gap does not close. This motivates reconstructing the key from a dedicated value (Section 3.1).
at near-GQA quality, not a quality win.
Cache.Relative to GQA, shared KV and GVA without a separate positional slice require half the
cache scalars when only values are retained. With DRoPE the ratio is1
2 +dr/(2Gdh)(Section 3.4),
correspondingtoabout47%savedat dr=16and45%at dr=24forourgrouping. Thesearerepresentation-
level counts, not measured serving-memory reductions. Ordinary-RoPE variants cannot use the absorbed
decode path and require position-dependent key reconstruction.
6 Limitations
The roughly 45–47% cache reduction for decoupled-RoPE GVA describes theintendeddecode state:
groupedV plus a sharedkrope. Omitting the positional slice gives the idealized 50% value-only reduction.
We have developed custom decoding kernels and are currently testing their inference performance,
with an open-source release planned soon. Fused decode throughput, peak serving memory, and batch
capacity measurements are not reported here.
All reported comparison runs use one scale (approximately 350M parameters), one data mix (30B
FineWeb-Edu tokens), and three different random seeds per benchmark configuration, with scores
averaged across runs. DRoPE withdr=24is behind GQA on average; we have not systematically swept
RoPE width, additive versus carved allocation, or longer contexts. Shared KV is a failed first cut, not a
baseline we recommend.
7 Conclusion
GVA stores grouped values and reconstructs keys with a linear mapK =VM . Sharing one vector as
both key and value halves the cache but does not match GQA in the observed run. Reconstructing the
key and matching its initial scale to the query yields quality close to GQA. A small shared decoupled
RoPE channel keeps position compatible with absorbingM at decode. Relative to GQA, the intended
9
persistent cache is roughly half, while downstream quality remains in the same broad band (Table 2). We
have developed custom decoding kernels and are currently testing their end-to-end inference performance,
with an open-source release planned soon. Further work includes completing this evaluation and a
broader sweep of RoPE width, model scale, and random seeds.
References
[1] A. Vaswani et al. Attention Is All You Need.NeurIPS, 2017.
[2] N. Shazeer. Fast Transformer Decoding: One Write-Head is All You Need.arXiv:1911.02150, 2019.
[3] J. Ainslie, J. Lee-Thorp, M. de Jong, Y. Zemlyanskiy, F. Lebrón, and S. Sanghai. GQA: Training
Generalized Multi-Query Transformer Models from Multi-Head Checkpoints.EMNLP, 2023.
[4] DeepSeek-AI. DeepSeek-V2: A Strong, Economical, and Efficient Mixture-of-Experts Language
Model.arXiv:2405.04434, 2024.
[5] B. Zhang and R. Sennrich. Root Mean Square Layer Normalization.NeurIPS, 2019.
[6] T. Dao, D. Y. Fu, S. Ermon, A. Rudra, and C. Ré. FlashAttention: Fast and Memory-Efficient
Exact Attention with IO-Awareness.NeurIPS, 2022.
[7] W. Kwon et al. Efficient Memory Management for Large Language Model Serving with PagedAt-
tention.SOSP, 2023.
[8] G. Penedo, H. Kydlíček, L. Ben Allal, A. Lozhkov, M. Mitchell, C. Raffel, L. von Werra, and T. Wolf.
The FineWeb Datasets: Decanting the Web for the Finest Text Data at Scale.arXiv:2406.17557,
2024.
[9] R. Zellers, A. Holtzman, Y. Bisk, A. Farhadi, and Y. Choi. HellaSwag: Can a Machine Really
Finish Your Sentence?ACL, 2019.
[10] K. Sakaguchi, R. Le Bras, C. Bhagavatula, and Y. Choi. WinoGrande: An Adversarial Winograd
Schema Challenge at Scale.AAAI, 2020.
[11] T. Mihaylov, P. Clark, T. Khot, and A. Sabharwal. Can a Suit of Armor Conduct Electricity? A
New Dataset for Open Book Question Answering.EMNLP, 2018.
[12] Y. Bisk, R. Zellers, R. Le Bras, J. Gao, and Y. Choi. PIQA: Reasoning about Physical Commonsense
in Natural Language.AAAI, 2020.
[13] P. Clark et al. Think You Have Solved Question Answering? Try ARC, the AI2 Reasoning
Challenge.arXiv:1803.05457, 2018.
[14] Z. Liu et al. KIVI: A Tuning-Free Asymmetric 2bit Quantization for KV Cache.ICML, 2024.
[15] G.Hinton, O.Vinyals, andJ.Dean.DistillingtheKnowledgeinaNeuralNetwork.arXiv:1503.02531,
2015.
[16] H. Touvron et al. Llama 2: Open Foundation and Fine-Tuned Chat Models.arXiv:2307.09288,
2023.
[17] V. Tripathi and A. Kumar. Grouped Query Experts: Mixture-of-Experts on GQA Self-Attention.
arXiv:2606.20945, 2026.
10
[18] A. Kumar, L. Owen, N. Roy Chowdhury, and F. Güra. ZClip: Adaptive Spike Mitigation for LLM
Pre-Training.arXiv:2504.02507, 2025.
[19] FrontiersMind. Lumma-0.6B-Base.Hugging Face model repository, 2026. https://huggingface.
co/FrontiersMind/Lumma-0.6B-Base.
11
A Query–Key Scale
If query and key coordinates are centered and weakly correlated, with standard deviationsσQ and σK,
then for row vectors
Var
qk⊤
√dh

≈σ 2
Qσ2
K.(15)
When the product is too small, softmax sees nearly equal logits and attention is flat. When it is too
large, a few positions dominate. Figure 4 shows both regimes.
GQA obtainsQ and K from separate projections of the same hidden state, providing a reference
for their initial scales rather than a guarantee that they match. In GVA,K =VM , so the scale ofK
also depends onM. In our initial runs, default initialization leftK far belowQ, and early training was
spent adjusting this mismatch.
Initialization.Let din be the input width ofM, namely the value width. Assuming approximately
centered value coordinates with varianceσ2
V, independent of the initial map entries, we draw
Mij∼N
 
0,
σ2
Q
σ2
V din
!
.(16)
Then Var(Kj)≈d inσ2
V Var(Mij) = σ2
Q, soK starts at approximately the same RMS asQ. The target
uses the query scale after any query normalization. After initialization,M remains learnable. Optional
query RMSNorm [5] controls the query scale, but the variance-fixed row in Table 2 remains competitive
without it. This initialization does not normalize the cached values.
Decoupled RoPE.Apply the same rule per slice. The fan-in of M is the value width, not the
content width. Initialize the shared positional-key projection sokrope matches the initial RMS ofqrope.
Assess positional and content scales separately: pooling them into one key variance hid the mismatch
in early runs.
Figure 5 complements Figure 4 by varying query and key scales together, showing that equal scales
alone do not prevent flat or highly concentrated attention.
Figure 4: Illustrative attention heatmaps on a 10-position sequence with matched query and key scales
(left), keys that are too small (middle), and keys that are too large (right). Small keys produce nearly
uniform attention; large keys concentrate the weights. Each panel uses its own color scale.
12
Figure 5: Attention heatmaps (10× 10) with matched scalesσQ =σK∈{ 0.006, 1, 4, 8} (left to right).
Small σ gives nearly uniform weights (≈ 0.1per key); unit σ gives moderate variation; largeσ gives
peaked, near one-hot rows. Each panel uses its own color scale. Absolute scale controls whether softmax
is flat, selective, or peaked.
13
B Extra Evaluation Curves
Per-task accuracy over training for the seven configurations in Table 2. The plots retain the original
run names and horizontal-axis units.
Figure 6: HellaSwag accuracy over training.
Figure 7: WinoGrande accuracy over training.
14
Figure 8: OpenBookQA accuracy over training.
Figure 9: ARC-Easy accuracy over training.
15
Figure 10: ARC-Challenge accuracy over training.
16