Presenters: Richard Ho, VP of Hardware. Ravi Narayanaswami, Member of Technical Staff. Chris Leary, Member of Technical Staff. Presented at the Hot Chips conference on Tuesday, August 25, 2026.

Here are the most important distilled parts of the presentation. I manually chose and pulled the quotes:

Richard leads the hardware team at OpenAI. He was part of Google’s TPU team. Ravi spent a decade at Cruise and also worked at Google. Chris was a Google TPU software lead.

First speaker: Richard

“The jalapeno chip. It is here. It’s real. We have the systems in the lab.” “This chip basically allows OpenAI to dofull stack optimization from the models through the software and compiler all the way down into the silicon.” “We did basicallythe entire RTL execution in nine months.”

They were able to do it so quickly because they started with a blank slate with a new design with no legacy architecture or legacy chips to support. They focused on accelerating OpenAI workloads. Since those workloads were large language models, all LLMs benefited.

Key Context by Tae Kim is a reader-supported publication. To receive new posts and support my work, consider becoming a free or paid subscriber.

Second speaker: Ravi

“Just two things that matter. How long the user waits and how much energy the request takes.”

OSS performance

“Almost 1500 tokens per second per user. This used to be the domain of SRAM-based accelerators. Well,HBM is not the bottleneck. On the right, we delivered today’s highest throughput at 4x less latency.”

The world needs fast and cheap. Jalapeno delivers both.

DeepSeek performance

“700 tokens per second per user. Clearly SRAM based territory. 5x lower latency for today’s highest throughput. So it’s the same story. Only difference is the advantages grew. The larger the model, the larger the advantage.”

Kimi performance

“We didn’t spend much time optimizing Kimi at all, I think we spent a few days”

Design Philosophy

“We needed to decide when we starting off the project whether we want to make a heavily decode, hyper optimized chip ora chip that was really good at decode but it was really good at pre-fill as well. And we chose the latter.. Another reason we decided we wanted a single chip solution was preserving locality.”

Third speaker: Chris

“The show FLOPS don’t matter. It’s how many flops you actually deliver in the workload to the user.”

“And that leads us to the Jalapeno architecture. It isa memory-sliced architecture.” “Every core has a local view of its own HBM slice.”

“That means there's no contention on some global memory subsystem, but it also means thatyou have to think about how your workload is going to map onto this machine.”

Jalapeno was designed to reduce wait times by placing data where it is needed and having it arrive when it is needed. The architecture minimizes chip idle time and data movement, keeping data close to the compute. It is optimized for LLM inference.

“What we've built is actually aspecialized collective network for the cores to talk to each other at high performance. Again, you have to plan out how you're going to map onto the machine.But the benefit of this is it's choreographed and orchestrated to have those values in the registers exactly when you need them.”

The Team

“Okay,so you want to build the best chip in the world, and you want to go real fast. You have two choices. Build a really big team or build a really small team. We picked the latter, and we actually kind of discovered over the course of this program what makes that work well. And what we discovered was really the key to that really fast cadence that you saw at the beginning of the talk, was being able to run this loop. You might call it agile, you might call it co-design.”

The team introduced a new hardware programming environment, which OpenAI’s AI models became super proficient at writing programs.

“Butwith modern frontier LLMs like Sol and Astra, it is really good at writing kernels for this spatial architecture.” “Even for ones that we've expert tuned, often the AI is able tosqueeze some additional performanceout.”

“The whole idea is that we want to unlock the ability to really get them for the workloads and deliver the performance and performance per watt. Because at the end of the day, that’s theonly thing that matters in terms of end-to-end workloads is how we get that delivered performance per watt.”

Back to Richard:

“This is step one of a multi-generational roadmap.

We havegeneration two already well under development, and we’re heading towards tapeout in some of the number of months... The whole point is that this is going to lower the cost of infrastructure, as I said at the beginning. And I’m really proud of the team.” “I also want to give a really big shout out to our partners, Broadcom and Celestica, who are very key partners for us to be able to deliver this capability here.”

Q&A

Question: For the nine-month tape out number how much of the chip was existing Broadcom IP versus what you designed from scratch, right?

Answer:Most of the chip is designed from scratch. The compute die I think only has like some interface IP and there’s an IO chip as well as you saw in the diagram a lot of the interfaces are existing IP, the rest of it was all like fresh RTL in XLS plus and Verilog.

Question: Michael with NVIDIA. Curious if you could elaborate a little bit about your networking setup. So specifically, do you use ESUN for scale-up networking protocol or something custom? And are the links using 200 gigabit or 100 gig?

Answer: We’re using ascale-up Ethernet protocol and it’s 200 gigabit. Thanks.

Question: Did you have any specialized cells, specialized memories, any specialized circuit and silicon techniques that you used?

Answer: That wasstandard cell methodology.

Question: What frequency were you targeting?

Answer: So we’re running 1.7 gigahertz on the parts that we have in the lab, but the POR we should get up to 1.8. So it’s sandbagged a little bit. And it is sustained performance.

Tae: If you want to know what OpenAI’s chip means for investors, read my Hot Chips conferencekey takeaways postfrom last week.

Key Context by Tae Kim is a reader-supported publication. To receive new posts and support my work, consider becoming a free or paid subscriber.