Semantic KV Cache Compression for Long-Context Inference
Abhinandan
@abhibuilds
·
22小时
关注
6
912
Frontier models do not remember a prompt as text. 
They remember it as internal key-value states spread across layers and attention heads. During decoding, the model does not reread the original prompt from scratch. It attends back into this cached state.
That detail sounds like implementation machinery, but it changes how we should think about RAG and agents. If the serving system compresses the KV cache, it is deciding which parts of the past remain available to the model. In other words, KV cache compression is not only about saving memory. It is about choosing what the model is still allowed to remember.
For short prompts, the KV cache is just a serving detail. For long-context RAG, code agents, document agents, and multi-step workflows, it becomes part of the system’s memory path. If the cache is compressed badly, the model may lose access to the exact token that grounded the answer.
This creates a subtle failure mode: retrieval succeeds, but generation still fails. 
The right document was found. The right sentence entered the prompt. The answer was still wrong because the compressed KV cache dropped the critical evidence before decoding.
What the KV cache stores
A transformer decoder generates one token at a time. For each new token, every attention layer compares the current query vector against the keys of previous tokens, then uses the matching values to build the next hidden representation.
Without caching, the model would recompute keys and values for all previous tokens at every generation step. KV caching avoids that. During prefill, the model processes the prompt and stores key and value tensors for each token at each layer. During decoding, it appends the new token’s KV states and reuses the old ones.
That makes decoding much faster, but the cache grows with context length. The more tokens in the prompt, the more previous states the GPU has to store and read. H2O describes this directly: the KV cache is transient state stored in addition to model parameters, and its size scales linearly with sequence length and batch size.
For long-context RAG, this is painful. The user question may be short, but the prompt can include thousands or tens of thousands of retrieved tokens. Every retrieved chunk becomes KV state during prefill. Every extra document increases memory pressure.
Grouped-query attention(GQA) helps reduce this cost by letting multiple query heads share fewer key-value heads. The GQA paper positions it between multi-head attention and multi-query attention, showing quality close to multi-head attention while approaching multi-query decoding speed. But GQA does not remove the problem. It reduces the number of KV heads, while long contexts still push cache memory upward.
So inference systems compress or evict KV states.
Recency is simple, but not enough
The simplest eviction policy is a sliding recency window.
Keep the latest tokens. Drop older tokens.
This works for some language modeling because the next token is often most dependent on recent local context. If the model is continuing a sentence, nearby tokens matter a lot. But long-context tasks often need information far from the end of the prompt.
A RAG prompt might look like this:
System instruction. > User question. > Retrieved document  > 1. Retrieved document > 2. Retrieved document > 3. Final answer instruction.
The final tokens may include formatting rules or the user’s question restatement. The critical evidence may be buried in document 2. A recency window can preserve the end of the prompt while dropping the evidence.
StreamingLLM found a related issue in streaming generation. Pure window attention fails when the text length exceeds the cache size, but keeping the initial tokens recovers much of the performance because some early tokens act as attention sinks. The paper also notes that these attention sinks can receive strong attention even when they are not semantically important.
That observation is important. High attention is not always the same as useful evidence. Some tokens are structurally useful for attention stability. Some tokens are semantically useful for answering. A good cache policy must not confuse the two.
Heavy hitters and attention-score pruning
A more advanced idea is to keep tokens that receive a lot of attention.
H2O introduced the idea of heavy-hitter tokens: a small portion of tokens contribute most of the value in attention computation. Its cache policy dynamically retains a balance of recent tokens and heavy hitters, reducing memory footprint while preserving quality across evaluated tasks.
This is a strong improvement over pure recency. If a token keeps receiving attention, it is probably useful. But “probably” is doing a lot of work.
Attention-score pruning has two weaknesses in grounded long-context systems.
First, attention can favor structural tokens. Initial tokens, delimiters, formatting anchors, and repeated terms may get high attention without containing the answer.
Second, attention aggregated across many heads can wash out specialized behavior. Different attention heads can do different jobs. Some may track syntax. Some may track position. Some may track recent context. Some may retrieve semantically important evidence. If the eviction policy averages everything together, the semantic retrieval signal can be diluted.
SnapKV moved the field toward head-aware compression. It observes that each attention head can consistently focus on specific prompt attention features during generation, and that the pattern can be estimated from an observation window near the end of the prompt. It then selects important KV positions for each attention head instead of using one uniform policy.
This is the right direction: the cache policy should respect what different heads are doing.
Semantic retrieval heads
CompressKV builds on the same problem but focuses on a specific long-context failure: preserving semantically important evidence.
Its claim is that existing KV eviction methods often apply heuristic scoring over all heads in GQA-based LLMs, but this ignores different head functions and can evict critical tokens. Instead, CompressKV identifies Semantic Retrieval Heads, or SRHs, that capture initial tokens, final tokens, and semantically important mid-context evidence. Those heads are then used to select which token KV pairs should remain in the compressed cache.
This is a useful mental model.
Not every head should vote equally on what memory to keep. If some heads are better at retrieving answer-bearing evidence from the middle of a long prompt, their attention patterns should matter more for cache retention.
A simplified semantic KV-retention policy looks like this:
python
def retain_kv_tokens(tokens, attn, semantic_heads, layer_budget, pinned_spans):
    retained = set()

    # Always keep tokens that define task authority and answer framing.
    for span in pinned_spans:          # system instruction, user question, final answer cue
        retained.update(span.token_ids)

    for layer in attn.layers:
        scores = defaultdict(float)

        # Score tokens using heads that behave like semantic retrievers.
        for head in semantic_heads[layer]:
            for token_id, weight in attn[layer][head].items():
                scores[token_id] += weight

        # Prefer evidence spans over isolated high-attention tokens.
        scores = smooth_over_neighboring_tokens(scores, window=3)

        budget = layer_budget[layer] - count_retained_in_layer(retained, layer)
        retained.update(top_k(scores, k=max(0, budget)))

    return retained
First, pin tokens that should not be evicted: system instructions, user question, answer-format constraints, and sometimes source delimiters. Second, score candidate tokens using the heads that appear to retrieve semantically important information. Third, smooth scores over small spans because evidence is rarely a single isolated token. Fourth, apply a layer-specific budget because layers may not tolerate eviction equally.
The key change is that the cache budget is not spent only on recency or global attention. It is spent on task-critical structure plus evidence-bearing tokens.
Why layer budgets matter
KV cache compression is not only a token-selection problem. It is also a layer-allocation problem.
A transformer layer is not just a repeated copy of the same computation. Lower layers, middle layers, and upper layers can play different roles. Some may encode local lexical information. Some may build longer-range associations. Some may be more sensitive to losing specific token states.
CompressKV includes layer-wise budget allocation using offline estimates of layer-wise eviction error. In its reported results, it preserves over 97% of full-cache performance using only 3% of the KV cache on LongBench question-answering tasks, and reaches 90% accuracy with 0.7% KV storage on Needle-in-a-Haystack.
The important idea is not only the reported number. It is the system design principle.
Uniform compression is convenient, but the model is not uniform. If one layer is highly sensitive to dropping mid-context evidence and another layer is robust, they should not receive the same budget. Cache compression should be aware of where eviction hurts.
This is similar to production resource allocation in other systems. You do not allocate CPU, memory, and latency budgets evenly across all components. You allocate them based on bottlenecks and failure sensitivity.
The RAG failure mode
Consider a support RAG system answering this question:
“Can this customer get a refund after 30 days?”
The retriever finds three chunks. One contains the general refund policy. One contains a special enterprise-contract clause. One contains a procedural instruction about how to process the refund.
The critical sentence is in the middle chunk:
“After 30 days, refunds require manager approval unless the customer is on the enterprise exception list.”
The full prompt contains that sentence. Retrieval succeeded.
Now the serving engine compresses the KV cache before decoding. A recency policy keeps the final instruction and recent user question. An attention-heavy policy keeps initial tokens, source separators, and repeated policy terms. The exact exception sentence receives lower aggregate attention during early decoding and gets evicted.
The final answer becomes:
“No, refunds after 30 days are not allowed.”
This is not a hallucination in the usual sense. It is not a retriever miss. It is not a bad chunking strategy. The information entered the model context, but the retained cache no longer preserved it well enough for generation.
That is why KV cache compression must be evaluated as part of grounded generation, not only as an inference optimization.
Cache compression is not prompt compression
Another common confusion is treating KV cache compression like prompt compression.
Prompt compression changes the input text before the model processes it. It removes or rewrites tokens from the prompt. KV cache compression happens after prefill. The model has already processed the full prompt, and the system decides which internal key-value states to keep for decoding.
These can fail differently.
Prompt compression can remove the evidence before the model ever sees it. KV cache compression can let the model see the evidence during prefill but remove its usable state before generation depends on it.
For debugging, this distinction matters.
If the evidence was not in the prompt, inspect retrieval, reranking, chunking, or prompt construction. If the evidence was in the prompt but dropped from retained KV spans, inspect cache policy. If the evidence was retained but the answer ignored it, inspect attention behavior, instruction conflicts, or decoding.
The production trace should make these stages separable.
What to evaluate
A generic benchmark score is not enough.
LongBench is useful because it covers long-context tasks such as single-document QA, multi-document QA, summarization, few-shot learning, synthetic tasks, and code completion in English and Chinese. Needle-in-a-Haystack-style tests are useful because they place a target fact inside a much larger context and measure whether the model can retrieve it.
But production evaluation should go further.
For RAG systems, build tests where the answer depends on a small mid-context evidence span. Vary the position of that evidence. Put distracting chunks near the beginning and end. Include policy exceptions, dates, negations, and entity-specific clauses. Then compare full cache, recency eviction, heavy-hitter eviction, and semantic retention.
Measure more than final accuracy:
retained-token overlap with gold evidence
answer faithfulness to retained evidence
citation support
cache budget by layer
dropped critical spans
TTFT and decode latency
throughput under batch load
memory saved per request
failures by evidence position
The most useful metric is often “critical evidence retained.” If the evidence token is gone, the answer can only be correct by luck or prior knowledge.
Observability in production
A production system does not need to expose raw KV tensors to every engineer. But it should expose enough metadata to debug cache-induced failures.
For each request, log the prompt spans: system, user query, retrieved chunks, tool outputs, memory entries, and answer instructions. Then log which spans were retained or dropped under the compression policy. For privacy, this can be done with span IDs, token ranges, content hashes, and source document IDs rather than raw text.
If the final answer is wrong, you want to know whether the relevant source chunk was retrieved, placed in the prompt, retained in the cache, and used in the final citation.
That gives a clean failure tree:
Retrieval missed the source. Prompt builder excluded it. Cache policy dropped it. Decoder ignored it. Citation layer misattributed it.
Each failure maps to a different fix.
Without this trace, a team may keep improving retrieval when the real bug is eviction. Or they may disable cache compression entirely when the narrower fix is to pin source spans or allocate more budget to semantic retrieval heads.
Production tradeoffs
Semantic KV compression is not free.
It may require profiling heads, estimating layer sensitivity, tracking span provenance, and running additional scoring logic during prefill. If implemented poorly, the overhead can eat into the latency gains. If the semantic-head identification is model-specific, every model upgrade may require recalibration. If the system pins too many spans, compression ratios fall.
There is also a quality-risk tradeoff.
A more aggressive budget saves more memory and may improve batch throughput, but it increases the chance of dropping important evidence. A conservative budget preserves quality but saves less. The right point depends on the product: a summarization tool may tolerate small compression artifacts; a legal, medical, or financial RAG system may not.
Agent systems add another wrinkle. Tool traces and memory entries can be long, but some tokens carry authority: user approvals, commit-boundary decisions, tool outputs, error messages, and policy constraints. Dropping those can change behavior later in the run. A coding agent that forgets the exact stack trace or test failure may confidently patch the wrong file.
So the retention policy should know span type, not just token position. Instructions, approvals, evidence, tool outputs, and transient chatter should not receive the same treatment.
What most people misunderstand
The first misunderstanding is that a large context window means the model can use all of it equally well.
A context window is capacity. It is not guaranteed usable memory. Once the serving system compresses the KV cache, the effective memory is whatever survives eviction.
The second misunderstanding is that attention score equals semantic importance.
Attention is a routing mechanism inside the model. It can highlight useful evidence, but it can also highlight anchors, delimiters, recent tokens, frequent tokens, and attention sinks. StreamingLLM’s attention-sink result is a clean warning: tokens can be attention-important without being meaning-important.
The third misunderstanding is that retrieval and inference can be optimized independently.
In a simple RAG architecture diagram, retrieval happens before generation. In production, that boundary is not enough. Retrieved chunks become prompt tokens. Prompt tokens become KV states. KV states may be compressed. Compressed states influence decoding. The answer depends on the whole path.
The useful engineering view is:
Retrieval decides what evidence enters the prompt. KV retention decides what evidence remains available during decoding.
If both are not evaluated, grounded generation can fail in ways that look mysterious.
Practical  implications
For a production RAG or agent system, the safe starting point is not maximum compression. It is span-aware conservative compression.
Pin system instructions, user task, final answer instruction, and high-confidence evidence spans. Preserve source delimiters if citation matters. Use semantic or head-aware scoring for the remaining budget. Track whether gold or cited evidence survived. Roll out compression by traffic class, not globally.
For long-context agents, include tool outputs and approval events in the protected span taxonomy. A tool result that says “migration failed because column X is missing” may be more important than the latest conversational turn. A user approval should not be evicted just because it occurred far from the end of the context.
For evals, create cases where the answer depends on one mid-context clause. That is the natural stress test for cache eviction. If the system passes only when the evidence is recent, the cache policy is not robust enough.
Semantic KV compression is a good example of an inference idea becoming an application-quality issue. It starts as a memory optimization, but it touches answer faithfulness, RAG debugging, agent reliability, and safety boundaries.
The model can only use the memory that survives.
That is why KV cache eviction should be treated as part of the AI system design, not as an invisible serving detail.