Sensor Tower | State of AI Report 2026 - Infogram
You have entered page 1
State of AI 
Report 2026
How AI is changing discovery, shopping, advertising, and more.
You have entered page 2
Executive Summary 
| Key Takeaways
01
02
The AI Assistant Market is Highly Concentrated, 
Yet Consumers Remain Open to Switching
Agentic Shopping is Fundamentally 
Changing E-Commerce Behavior
The top three AI Assistant apps now command an astonishing 89% of all global time spent in the category. However, absolute market dominance is fragile. For the first time, ChatGPT’s true audience market share dropped below 50% in early 2026 as competitors like Google Gemini and Claude gained ground. Consumers are actively switching between platforms to fulfill different needs, and they are highly reactive to corporate actions—such as the increase in ChatGPT uninstalls and concurrent surge in Claude downloads following OpenAI’s agreement with the US Department of War.
AI is completely rewiring how consumers discover and buy products, especially in research-heavy categories like Electronics and Home &amp; Garden. Built-in retail AI assistants are proving to be game-changers for engagement and revenue. For example, Amazon shoppers who use its AI assistant, Rufus, convert at nearly twice the rate of non-users and spend significantly more time on the platform. Similarly, Walmart has seen huge growth in adoption for its AI shopping assistant, Sparky.
03
04
Monetization is Maturing Through Premium and Professional Functionality
AI is Now a Mandatory Marketing 
and Discovery Engine Across All Industries
While download growth for Generative AI apps has slowed slightly from its initial boom, consumer spending continues to soar, projected to surpass $4 billion in the first half of 2026. This financial growth is being driven by a distinct shift toward professional, utility-driven use cases. For instance, Claude has seen its average revenue per user (ARPU) surge from under 50 cents to $2.76 by focusing heavily on business, research, and coding workflows, capturing an audience highly willing to pay for premium subscriptions.
AI is no longer siloed within the tech sector; it is a vital growth engine for all mobile verticals. Over 200,000 apps across iOS and Google Play now promote AI features in their descriptions. Consumers are actively seeking these tools out, with app downloads driven by "AI" keyword searches exploding by 651% in Health &amp; Wellness and 536% in Financial Services. Advertisers have taken note, pouring $1.3 billion into digital ads that feature AI-related messaging to capture consumer attention.
- All Rights Reserved
2
You have entered page 3
Sensor Tower 
| Our Customers
T
o
p publishers trust 
S
ensor Tower insights to grow their business
Note: Top publishers by app store revenue | Source: Sensor Tower
- All Rights Reserved
3
You have entered page 4
Ask AI!
Since this report covers some of the most advanced AI Assistants in the world, we decided to ask several chatbots for a brief summary of why readers need to keep track of the latest trends of AI in the mobile space:
ChatGPT
Google Gemini
Microsoft Copilot
Question: 
Response:
Brands and mobile app developers need to monitor AI’s impact on the digital economy because AI is rapidly changing how consumers discover products, interact with apps, and make purchasing decisions. AI-powered search, recommendations, advertising, and virtual assistants are reshaping customer journeys, reducing traditional traffic sources, and creating new opportunities for personalization and growth. Organizations that understand these shifts can adapt their marketing, product, and monetization strategies more effectively, while those that fail to track AI-driven changes risk losing visibility, engagement, and competitive advantage in an increasingly AI-mediated marketplace.
Why is it important for brands and mobile app developers to monitor how AI is impacting the digital economy?
- All Rights Reserved
4
You have entered page 5
Table of Contents
AI Stories of the Year
Rivals Look to Challenge ChatGPT
AI Agents are Changing How People Shop
AI is the New Place for Discovery — and Ads
GenAI Competitive Landscape
AI Market Landscape
AI Consumer Behavior
 GenAI Marketing
AI Across Verticals
 Mobile Market Trends
 Advertising Trends
Methodology &amp; Appendix 
6
12
18
22
35
43
50
58
65
- All Rights Reserved
© Sensor Tower Inc. - All Rights Reserved
5
Click to access available viewer actions.